challenger docs (#759)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/stack/protocol/fault-proofs/challenger.mdx

---
title: OP-Challenger Explainer
lang: en-US
description: Learn about OP-Challenger and how it operates within the OP Stack's fault proof system.
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'
import Image from 'next/image'

# OP-Challenger Explainer

The `op-challenger` operates as the *honest actor* in the fault dispute system and defends the chain by securing the `OptimismPortal` and ensuring the game will always resolve to the correct state of the chain. For verifying the legitimacy of claims, `op-challenger` relies on a synced, trusted rollup node as well as a trace provider (e.g., [Cannon](/stack/protocol/fault-proofs/cannon)).

Specifically, `op-challenger` performs the following actions:

*   monitors and interacts with dispute games
*   defends valid output root proposals
*   challenges invalid output root proposals
*   assists `op-proposer` by resolving claims and games once chess clocks expire
*   claims paid out bonds for both the challenger and proposer

## Architecture

> ```mermaid

Author: Yes

graph LR
L1Rpc[L1 RPC Provider] --> op-dispute-mon[Dispute Mon]
L1Beacon[L1 Beacon API] --> op-dispute-mon
L2Rpc[L2 op-node RPC Provider] --> op-dispute-mon
op-dispute-mon --> cannon[Cannon]
cannon --> op-program[op-program]
```

<Callout>
  The `cannon` and `op-program` executables are run in the `op-challenger` docker container as sub-processes when required to generate game trace data.
</Callout>

## Fault Detection Responses

`op-challenger` makes a decision on each claim in each game and decides whether to counter it or not based on its view of the validity of the claim. An honest challenger uses this basic logic:

1.  If the trusted node agrees with the output, `op-challenger` takes no action. An honest challenger does nothing because there are no claims it disagrees with. It continues to monitor the game in case someone posts a counter-claim to the valid root claim, in which case the challenger will participate in the game to defend the proposal.

> 2.  If the trusted node disagrees, `op-challenger` creates a new dispute game. In contrast to the above, an honest challenger aims to delete any output roots that its trusted node disagrees with in order to claim the bond attached to it. The honest challenger assumes that their rollup node is synced to the canonical state and that the fault proof program is correct, so it is willing to put its money on the line to counter any faults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  If the trusted node disagrees, `op-challenger` posts a counter-claim to challenge the proposed output. In contrast to the above, an honest challenger aims to delete any output roots that its trusted node disagrees with in order to claim the bond attached to it. The honest challenger assumes that their rollup node is synced to the canonical state and that the fault proof program is correct, so it is willing to put its money on the line to counter any faults.
```

<Callout>
  This implies the honest challenger never counters its own claim, since there is at most one honest counter to each claim, so an honest claim never has an honest sibling.
</Callout>

### Possible Moves

A move is a challenge against an existing claim and must include an alternate claim asserting a different trace. The honest challenger must first decide if it should counter the existing claim or if it should ignore it. It can wind up ignoring claims either because it agrees with them or because responding to that claim could lead it to have a "poisoned prestate" where it's implicitly agreeing to something false.

Then, once the honest challenger decides to move, it has these options:

*   **Attack** if it sees the value of the claim as incorrect
*   **Defend** if the value is correct; it's effectively disagreeing with the claim position
*   **Step** based on the game depth; steps can be attack or defend steps too, and it's the same contract method that gets called

<Callout type="warning">
  See the [specs](https://specs.optimism.io/fault-proof/stage-one/honest-challenger-fdg.html) for the full scope of the honest actor algorithm.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: I'm still pretty nervous about adding this level of detail into the docs. Seems like we should just link to the spec for this.  I'm not sure who we're targeting with this level of information that summarises the honest actor algorithm but isn't completely precise about it.  I'd be very tempted to just say that the challenger monitors each game as new claims are added and reacts according to the honest actor algorithm (with link to specs) to defend valid proposals and invalidate invalid proposals.

Author: stripped it down considerably. let me know what you think
